I want to know when the lights come on in New York
City immediately. Of course, here I'm sitting
here in the Pentagon, you know. How are
we going to find that out? Not that I got an idea.
Governor's Island then was still an Army post. Now
I think the Coast Guard got it. So I called them up on
the phone. And a sergeant. answered the
telephone. He was a duty sergeant, I guess,
because obviously this is a night when all
everything's black. I said, Sergeant, I have a
problem. He said, yes, sir, what it is? I said, if I
can help you. I said, I have to know immediately
when the lights come on in New York City. Can you
help me? He said, well, certainly. I said, what are
you going to do? He said, I'm going to get a private
and post him out there and watch. And just as soon as
Lower Manhattan, those lights come on, I'm going
to let you know. I said, thank you, Sergeant.
Really appreciate that. So that solved that
problem. Of course, that didn't bring the lights
on. And I notified the Navy. Of course, when you
notify the Navy or the Army and say, yes, they want
to know who's going to pay for this, because they
had to move some of the ships because of the
dockside. Of course, some of the crews are gone. It
takes time to get them underway. But they said,
sure, that they would do that. Fortunately, all of
our tactical airfields have auxiliary. So they
had no problems on their own. runways as far as some
thought for a while this might be a preliminary to
some sort of an attack because it's so widespread
and all the experts couldn't figure it out you know
but that this is impossible so we have a grid system
this goes out it's just rerouted any way you can
have a massive blackout like this plus the fact is
that why you have it it was two or three different
places which i called it circuit breakers that
would occur what would take them all out course you
know the solution finally was a massive surge
reverse surge they've just overloaded
everything that went up now i really don't know why
or how what caused that tremendous reverse surge
that knocked out on but it took them weeks to
finally decide at least to announce that did they
did they use the navy that way yep navy moved up and
uh they were able to start The auxiliary
generator, of course, that was just a small thing.
It didn't help the city very much. The Army
assisted with a generator, enabled Cronkite to
come on and report by candlelight. At least he had
power for his broadcast.
But it was calls coming from Many places. And
they'd come in because this was getting to be late
at night. What are you doing? Have the lights been
turned on. What do you hear? And the lights and
power didn't come on until the next day. I think it
was in the afternoon. But people were in a frantic,
you know, they were on elevators to stop, you know,
blackout. And you had people there. And how you get
them out, and they pounded. And the birth rate went
up, you know, after that. A lot of people had
nothing else to do. Now, another more hairy type of
experience, these are what you have, and you have
to stay right with it, of course. You have people
that expect you to have more information than
anybody. Sure. And that's your job to get it. But
one night, we thought we had a quiet night. And in
the... We have a conference room also. We've got a
big display board up here that shows the dew line
across the North. And only once we got alert, both
from the Colorado Springs American Command that
was showing up, there's an unidentified object
coming towards the United States. and just be
happy the heading is coming from the USSR. And now
you're really under the gun. At what point do you
push the panic button? And what you do is an SOP, of
course you notify the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
President, because they say it's got to be made,
what are we going to do about that? Are we going to
shoot it down, or what is it? And they finally
figured out that monitoring this thing and
tracking it It was too fast to be an aircraft. It
must be a missile. And now it's getting pretty
close to the dew line up there. They've been
monitoring it out in the distance. And so I was
talking to Colorado Springs. I said, at what point
do you think that I should alert the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the president? And he said, well, it's
getting pretty close. Because the way we figured
it, it's It's minutes, of course, it's still quite
a few minutes from the United States, but you've
got to react to a ship scrambling aircraft. Well,
they did scramble aircraft. So did you notify the
Joint Chiefs then? No, I hadn't done it yet, Steve.
But NORAD scrambled the aircraft? Yeah. Without
notifying the Joint Chiefs? Well, they can do that
routinely. But they weren't going to attack it.
This is just getting airborne into position. Of
course, they'd have a hell of a time attacking a
missile. Sure. So... Once again, I was lucky,
because my decision to delay it was correct.
Because then I got a hurried call back and said,
hold everything, because we've just found out
what our problem is. It was a computer that was
miscalibrated properly or something. Anyway, it
was misreading something that wasn't there, I
said. But it was really coming just as if it was
headed for the United States. So you get
situations like that, and you finally Find out if
it's OK. It's such a sense of relief. It's like
somebody taking a great load off. Another
situation, I'll just tell one more, and then I'll
move along to something else.
I had a call one night. And the reason why things
happen at night, when it's nighttime, of course,
in Washington, it's daytime in Vietnam and a lot of
other places in the world. So it can be very active
in the MCC at night. and slow going in the daytime.
Plus the fact you got everybody to help you in the
daytime. You know, the chairman of the joint,
everybody's there. You don't have all that
responsibility. You just let them call in. And
although you handle everything, you don't ever
call anybody unless it's really a need to. So I had
that call. They said that Cuba has just captured
one of our ships and that came out of I guess Key
West.
How do you know? Says because we were monitoring
and we listened to it and we had the Cubans said I
have captured and the name the name of the ship. So
we immediately asked where is that ship? Oh yes
this is a scientific I don't remember where it was
from, MIT or some college or university, was
assigned as a board doing some sort of underwater
research. And on that type of ship, they only come
on the air as intervals because they don't have
anybody to sit in the communication room 24 hours a
day. This is not a U.S. government ship, is it?
Yeah. It was a U.S. government ship? Yeah. No, it
was private. It was a private research ship. Yeah.
Okay. Well, sometimes that's a cover for
intelligence. In this case, this was a legitimate
research. And so after hearing this, well, we've
got to check it out, see. So they scrambled some
planes down in Florida. And they flew over the ship
and actually got dived down real close. But later
on, we found out this kind of frightened the crew
aboard that because they couldn't figure out what
the hell is everybody coming around here getting
so close to. It was off Cuba, near Cuba, but in
international waters, like Cuban waters. And
there was some Cuban ships at a distance, but not
right alongside this particular one. Crap. So
then the question comes, what are we going to do?
Because it appears to be heading for the harbor.
Are we going to intercept it?
And that's the unit side, too. You could really
make a stupid mistake. In this instance, there
wasn't any service
nearby. So I was trying to figure out what we were
going to do, what could be done, when
It just so happened that this ship came on the air. I
guess they came on the air because they were kind of
disturbed that they were being
attacked. Not really attacked, but scared. Going
down. In fact, they'd go down so low they could read
the name on the side. And they come on there. And
they said, well, we have had a report that you were
captured by the Cubans. Have you been captured?
They said, oh, no. We haven't been bothered. But we
monitored it. And it says, I have been captured. I
have captured this name. Well, as it turned out,
this just shows you how the lack of communication
or improper communication. What the Cubans said,
or the translation was wrong. When they said, I
have captured, they mean with the eye. I see. And
they were... They were identifying the ship back
to their headquarters that they were observing.
That shows you how you can get really all brewed up
during the nighttime or something like that.
Well, that's enough of those. Anyway, every day
that was something pretty interesting. You must
have really been sort of on the firing line. Well,
I'm going to have to tell one more because this is
one of the... We had another bombing pause. This is
separate from the other. We had several, you know,
during the bombing pause.
We had a paper that said, it went out to the far east
of Westmoreland's command, of which Admiral
Stark and the think tank knew that the president
had authorized that if you were being attacked,
then you were authorized to commence bombing
without coming back and getting the president's
permission. Otherwise, do not bomb until
authority is given from the president.
And this happened on a weekend when everybody's
gone.
Admiral Stark called in personally, when I was on
duty, and said that Westmoreland wants us to
resume the bombing. And Westmoreland didn't
control the bombing. Think back. He just had the
ground war. And I'd like to have permission, says
Admiral Stark, to commence bombing. I said, sir, I
can't give you an answer now, but I'll call you back
in just a few minutes. Well, General Wheeler, who
was the chairman of the Joint Chiefs at that time,
wasn't there. The acting chief, chairman, was the
Air Force General, Grok. I can't recall his name
right now. And he said, well, that's easy. He says,
you just tell Admiral Stark to commence bombing. I
said, well, don't you think we better refer this to
at least the Secretary of Defense? No. But we have
the piece of paper. Tell him to go ahead. I'll take
full responsibility.
He really wasn't in a position to take full, even
though he was active chief, but this was a little
bit stronger medicine. Well, now I'm on the spot.
Am I going to disregard a four-star general that
really I'm working for in the MCC? Well, Vance was
always a good, steady pre-NC to all of us, and he was
the deputy secretary of defense. Sonny Vance,
yeah. So I called him up. And of course, he was hard
to get a hold of, because he was out guest
somewhere. And I had to run down several times as a
guest in an office somewhere. And that makes it
difficult, because you can't talk classified.
Now you're next out again. Because all of this is
monitored. Everything we said is taped. It's
taped for protection, both of the people that
you're talking with, and also to be sure they're
accurate. Who said what? I wanted it taped.
Terrible things can happen with mistakes like
that. So I called him up and I said,
the acting chairman had given Admiral Stark the
green light to commence bombing him. And there was
a long pause. I said, hello, sir, are you still
there? He said, yes, I'm still there. I said, is
there anything you want me to do? I just wanted to be
sure you were informed. He said, no, you don't do
anything. Take it from a collar. I'll take it from
here. And I never heard any repercussions from
that. So apparently, I'm sure that was something.
So you didn't give Stark the green light? Oh, no. Or
did you? No, that's another thing. After he told me
that, after I talked to Vance, We still had the
responsibility.
And I told him what I was going to do. I didn't recite
this very accurately because that's what I was
told to do. And he paused a long time and said, oh,
that's all right. Thank you for calling. I'll
handle it from here. So I called Admiral Stark back
and told him that it was affirmative. And then I got
to thinking, what he needs is an order. He ought to
have that in writing. So I called back the
gentleman and I said, I think this ought to be in
writing. I relate orally
of what you directed, but I think he ought to have a
message. Oh, no, he don't need a message.
And he said, all right, send one if you want to. I
said, who shall I have sign? Your name? Yeah, I'll
sign it Monday. So we sent off a message
confirming. I'll say it never was any
repercussion, so I don't know what dance he
probably called the president and told him.
We'll have to get off of that one. Well, I wanted to
know, there's a number of things at first I want to
know about this. this job in the Pentagon. That
sounds absolutely fascinating. One is, during
this time there was a tremendous increase in the
technology that America was using in fighting the
war in Vietnam in a space program. Was technology,
and you've already alluded to this when you talked
about the communication possibilities, but was
technology, were there examples of rapid
increase in new technologies in the Pentagon at
this time?
This new communication system had just been
installed, so I don't know of any... So during that
year, it was installed just before I got there, so
I...
I don't know of anything...
And they were computerizing a lot of things, too.
Aside from... This was a day-to-day hour, many for
many, but... A lot of the things that we had files of
being placed on the computer. But I don't know of
any, as you say, any dramatic additions we had or
changes due to the space program or the
development of technology. Now, why did you only
stay on this job for one year and then you went to
Chief Far Eastern Division? Because it was a
one-year tour of duty. And you got reassigned.
Everybody, they figured it. One year is all that
also should be there. And also for his own benefit,
you would want him. True. Gosh, actually, you've
done that a few months. Now, the troops invaded the
Dominican Republic in 1966. Were you on the
hotline there? Yeah. Not there because, I'm glad
you mentioned that, because whenever there's a
troubled spot, they don't expect, The flag also on
duty to handle that. You immediately set up a task
force. Sure. It's in an MC. There are rooms for the
task force. And that task force handles it. Even
their communications come right in there. So the
Dominican Republic was handled. And that task
force is similar. You've got CIA, State
Department, Department of Defense. They're in a
room right next to you. Yeah. So they can get all the
information they need as fast as possible. That's
right, from us and from our facility and also from
them. Of course, they had to use the same
communication. And that was very active. Also in
NMC, we produced every day a top secret, I won't
call it a newspaper, but it's more of a pamphlet or a
magazine type of thing. And that was our response.
We had to go to press early enough to get it all, to
confirm the accuracy before the people who were
deceived arrived. And that would be the Chairman,
Joint Chiefs, Secretary of Defense, and people of
that category. And it had a box score, the number of
strikes we made during the last 24-hour period.
the number of planes we lost, what assessment we
had of the damage. But usually you had it because
the reconnaissance plane flew right after you
took a picture, and the carrier, and from
otherwise too. And summer of the ground action,
where it occurred, that's right. Number of
casualties, number of prisoners taken, if any.
Later on, that crazy body count was stupid. The
press forced that on them, you know. But tell me
about that body count. Of course, a number of
people have said that that's distorted, and even a
number of generals have said that the body count
was distorted. What were your feelings on that?
Well, I'm sure it was distorted. Why did you say it
was stupid? Because they never should have
started it. The media forced it on them. I'm not
blaming them for the poor body feelings, but But
they gave an estimate, like you normally do
anywhere. We estimate 15 or 20 or whatever. So they
put the pressure. What do you mean, estimate?
Either you know or you don't know what you base your
estimate on. So they keep pressing them like that
to where they'd have to actually, that's how they
got the body counts. How do you know? Well, we sent
somebody out and they counted the body. But that's
the worst thing here. Who? Who goes and counts the
bodies? You don't go up and count children, dogs,
and all other bodies. But that's kind of a callous
way. Of course, war is a terrible thing the way you
look at it. But when you start, it would be much
better, I think, to just give an estimate. And I'm
saying that estimate is exaggerated. It probably
was, or is. But that's a more... civilized way, I
think. But you weren't directly involved in any of
the planning or staging of the Dominican Republic
situation. No. They set up a task force. Oh, we did.
It was monitored. And it was well underway when I
came in there. That was one of my first tasks force.
OK. I'd like you just to give your opinion of some of
the people that you worked with who were very
important during this time as far as national
affairs. And one of the most controversial is
Robert Mackinac.
Well,
he's really a difficult one to...
Once again, brilliant mind. Yeah. Brilliant.
And he thinks he's usually ahead of the people
mentally. And therefore, like, makes him
impatient.
And he particularly, if somebody would ask him a
question of what he just said, like, that was
really, he'd be impatient with that because he'd
say, well, didn't you hear what I just said? Of
course, what this person means, maybe I heard it,
but I don't quite understand it. But he didn't like
people like that around him, you see. And he
surrounded himself with some brain. When they
talked about the whiz kids, he got some really
sharp, bright young people. Most of them are
scientifically trained. And many of them didn't
understand the weapons of war or how you fight a
war. But they were good because with their system
analysis, They tried to fight or win the war by
system analysis. And of course, if you could ever
do that, we really progressed. That would be good
where you don't even need people in the field. For
example, the development of the electronics
defense. We were going to put that in, and nobody
could penetrate because of monitoring. But all
sorts of things happened for them. It cost a lot of
money. That was the system analysis of whiz kids
and developing those things. But McNamara,
he was a positive and he was friendly in his own cold
way. You know, you didn't expect him to be smiling
like that. But he could kind of look at you with his
eyes kind of half closed and kind of nod at you. You
knew that. Apparently, everything's not so bad.
He was impatient with generals, admirals, and
probably so because when you spend, say, 25 or 30
years in the military, all different situations,
different places, you seem to assess the
situation based on your education, background,
experience, and so forth. If you've got a civilian
that hasn't trod that long rocky path, he comes
from over here. And he sees it, and it's good to have
him to look at it, because he may see a lot of fresh
new things that could be done and will be done. But
this guy here seems to be, and I guess I'm being
impatient, I guess I figure that these generals
are kind of slow and they put the status quo and they
haven't had a new idea in years. They're all
training to fight the last war and never can
foresee or project to create the future. So, and
these young guys, they weren't handicapped by
experience. You know, they're willing to try
anything. Well, they wouldn't call it trial and
error, but it would be a... And I never heard any of
them say something was wrong. If it didn't pan out,
it was because something had been overlooked. So I
guess what I'm saying is they saw the world
entirely different than we saw it. But we knew we
had to do the fighting. And we were responsible.
Just like, look at that desert fiasco in Iran.
Everybody says the military becomes a joke, and
they shouldn't be. Aircraft maintenance is poor.
You know, everything. Why can't we learn to do at
least as well as Israel can do, see, with all of
that? So we get the responsibility for whatever
goes wrong or something doesn't work. That's the
reason I'm talking about Korea. Yet,
people change things or alter them, and then at the
last moment, They'll change their mind and say,
well, I was wrong. Fulbright said that, you
remember, about the Gulf of Tonkin. He said, yes, I
voted for it. I led. I was the president's
spokesman on that. But I was wrong, because I bring
back 50,000 young men.
But McNamara had these real fine guys. Was there a
lot of jealousy between, or not jealousy,
antagonism, I guess, hard feelings between
McNamara and the Whiz Kids and the upper echelon
military? Not so much with McNamara, but he really
had some youngsters that, for example, Halpern is
one. You may recognize his name. He's the one who's
had the most. Martin Halpern. Martin Halpern. You
ever meet him? No, he's a historian. The one who
sued Kissinger. It was Kissinger and everybody
else. Martin Halpern had just finished Harvard,
Ph.D. He came to the Pentagon Department of
Defense as a, what do you call him, research
analysis, you know, a fellow, a White House
fellow. Well, he wasn't a White House fellow. I
said, maybe I'll think of the word in a few minutes.
Of course, they come in for a year for experience,
and they're really studying government
functions. He was so intrigued with it, he stayed
on. He came to the Pentagon with preconceived
ideas on everything. And he wouldn't listen. I
served on committees with him. In the Far East
Division, we had a committee
Bill Bundy was on. Brzezinski, you know, the
former. Sure. He was on that committee. Halbert
was on it. I was on it. I represented joint staff.
Halbert represented the Department of Defense.
And we addressed, this was the Far East Division,
this joint. Did you have a State Department
official on that too? Yeah, he chaired it. Bundy
chaired it. Oh, okay. Bunded State had the Far
East. That was his area. CIA man on that, too? Yeah.
And he was the one name I couldn't remember who
later became the chief. So we had Brzezinski. DIA
on that, too?
You know, I don't remember about DIA, but they must
have been on that. OK, but what about an offering
then? Well, there was a paper. that had been
approved by the president of which, on this
particular committee, and this was for the Far
East, they had similar committees to other parts
of the world. And in it, it said, it was perfectly
written that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had a vote,
and the Department of Defense had a vote. Halperin
said, the Joint Chiefs are subordinate to the
Department of Defense, therefore, You cannot
vote differently than I do. And I said, but the
paper, here it is right here. He says, I don't care.
Now, he had been misled because before we went, we
always had a subject agenda, of course. And we
would develop position papers. And we always,
before that, would take them over to Halpert for
his agreement. And there was another young man
also from New York. He worked on the transition.
team I noticed here a while back. He's a lawyer from
New York. Because we weren't coordinated, and of
course it would be unusual for us to really
disagree, but there was disagreement. He said he
don't have the vote. Well, we disagreed, so we went
ahead and voted, and Halbert said, I object. Mr.
Chairman, because the Joint Chiefs do not have a
separate vote, and this is counter to our vote, and
I represent the Department of Defense of
McNamara. And I thought I disagreed, and I quoted
the paper. Bundy ruled that, for the time being,
since the paper said two votes, that he would rule
in my favor. So the record will show that defense
positions one in power over the other. Later on,
they supported the paper. They didn't have to
change the paper. They fired everybody. So they
purposely wanted the Joint Chiefs to have a vote in
these committees to represent the uniformed
military as opposed to the other. There wasn't any
world-shaking problem at all. But it was just
Halperin's attitude. Is that what you're saying?
Yeah, and that was his attitude on a lot of other
things. Then we finally got... It was just
uncooperative, or was that his deal?
Hard-headed. He thought, I guess he was an example
of what Ted Walsh was telling about some Ivy League
type. I'd hate to be working for Halverson. It
would be impossible to get along with him. But he
didn't understand. Never had any military
training. He'd never been a private or ever been a
Boy Scout. Well, finally, he left the Department
of Defense, and everybody just cheered. And why
did he show up over? in the White House working for
Kissinger.
And he started doing the same thing over there. Of
course, I had left then. I went down to Fort Monroe,
so I didn't have any dealings with him after he left
the department then. And I wasn't surprised at all
to find out that he would be involved. And I wasn't
surprised to find out he was going to carry this
suit to the Supreme Court. See, the settlement was
a dollar, and now since they won in the Supreme
Court, they want to raise it to several million
dollars. The old principle at the beginning, but
now he wants to make his million. There was another
guy, and I can't recall his name, but he was a
partner of Halpern, and he went over to the State
Department. He messed us up in the Defense
Department. He went over and did the same thing
with Halpern in the White House. I meant the White
House, not the State Department. Now, what about
Brzezinski? What was your opinion of him? Oh, he's
probably the, of all of the guys that I've met
around two years, he's probably the most
brilliant. And everybody agrees with that, even
with his. But sometimes he thinks, he's got a
creative mind. He's always thinking ahead.
And he's way ahead, even McNamara, he's ahead of
him on it. Of course, he doesn't have the training,
the scientific training that old McNamara had.
Brzezinski has an idea, a concept, and a solution
on every single problem. So when we meet as a
committee, and we even met to devise a way to end the
war in Vietnam, Couldn't get together, of course,
because everybody... We made a trip to Vietnam
together. We got briefed at all levels. When was
that?
Well, it was before Khe Sanh was attacked. You
remember that went on for quite some time. LBJ
promised the nation, he says, the Joint Chiefs
assured me Khe Sanh will not fall, which it didn't.
But we went to Khe Sanh, went to all of them, all over
Vietnam. And the situation wasn't so bad then. In
fact, that was the light at the end of the tunnel.
Everybody was seeing things. But Brzezinski, I
just can't praise him enough. Now, I've noticed
this critique of his service in the Security
Council was that brilliant mind, Great concept,
great vision. But then he didn't have the ability
to implement. When you get right down there, this
is great. Now, how do we get there from here? See,
now we've got to do this and this other thing. He
lost interest at that level. So you needed
somebody else to come over that followed him and
everything he did, and then come back and build a
place, a building block, where he could finally
get to the objective. But you would really be
impressed if you just sit down and hear that guy
talk. What about Bundy? Bundy, too. Bundy, by the
way, was on the firing line Sunday, whatever. He's
head of the Foreign Affairs magazine. Bill Bundy.
Yeah. He's a quiet, tall individual and not
impressive at all.
I mean, what he does, obviously, he wouldn't be
editor of this foreign affairs magazine,
but you'd have to be around him, and I wasn't around
him that much. He always seemed to be preoccupied.
He'd come to our meetings late because he chaired
them, and he didn't seem to always make himself
busy on very important issues. I don't know. Up to
speed on what had been done and where we were. So he
had a little guy, and I forgot his name. He ended up
later being ambassador to Korea that carried the
ball for Bundy on the sport. He knew all about
everything. But he was a feisty little guy. And he
was a hawk. Bundy was a dove. Of course, he's
probably
correct. You're not necessarily a dove if you
don't agree with what's doing. Maybe a hawk on what
you think is right. Of course, you also said that
you knew Cyrus Vance. Yeah. Would you describe
him?
Very friendly,
humble type of individual. Humility.
He's interested to know what you think of your
ideas, not like McNamara, who doesn't care your
ideas. You know, he's already solved the problem,
and you're wasting my time. Resentka, the same
thing. He's already got his ideas concept.
He too is way ahead. But Vance is a, and I think he's
been criticized in, the Secretary of State for
this. He wasn't necessarily a fighter. He seemed
to be more of a team player.
He doesn't want to create a diversified
views. He'd like to pull them together.
He would even come into the MCC, He'd almost always
preface his remarks, he'd like to know this, but
don't.
I hope it doesn't appear or something else. You
know, when Deputy Secretary of Defense comes in
and says, I want this done, you know, you figure out
how you're going to do it. Sure. That's what I mean
by humility. He certainly wasn't arrogant. And I
think the Secretary of State, the way he ran that,
But I was a little surprised and kind of proud of him
when he resigned because of that raid in Iran. So
with this white appearance, they have a strong
mind and principle.
Of course, he was very knowledgeable. He had been
Secretary of the Army. He had been Deputy
Secretary of Defense, which means that they carry
a big load. of coordinating and running it,
particularly getting into the budgetary. Then he
got to be Secretary of State. So he really knew his
way around. And he knew the military, certainly
the Army. But he was on top of the information. He
knew he was preparing. And I like him. I admire him.
I think he's a real fine gentleman. It's a pity that
we couldn't temper
somewhere between Haig and Vance would be a real
good solid Secretary of State, you know, not too
positive and too strong in strong-minded views or
saying things that Haig does. This is it, you know,
just a declaration of a fact when maybe it should be
a declaration of a study, ongoing study that we're
looking at. Did you happen to get to know Alexander
Hague at this time? No. He wasn't in the White House
then at all. No, he was not. He was still a
low-ranking colonel somewhere around in the
Army. Well, he was in Vietnam, that's where he was.
Tell me what you did as Chief Far Eastern Division
when you left the National Military Command
Center for the next two years. Yeah, when I talk
about this committee with State, this is as a chief
here. The Chief of the Far East Division He is in
charge of all plans concerning the area, which, of
course, is designated as Japan and Korea, the
Philippines, Taiwan,
Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Burma, Thailand,
Indonesia, and the islands in the Pacific, which
we're
not custodian. Territories. Territory, yeah.
That was included and that came into active play
because then they were still discussing, you
know, what were they going, what's going to be the
status. Freedom would become a commonwealth. And
what was your I mean, when you are chief, obviously
you're not dealing with the command decisions in
Vietnam, although that's in the Far East
Division. What exactly are you dealing with?
Policy planning? You have a good point. Since
Vietnam and Laos and Cambodia was an active
theater, this became operational planning. So
that was taken out of our shop. Now, long-range
planning if we're talking about what will happen
as a cessation of hostilities. And that would come
in our ear.
Thailand was in between, see? That's supposed to
be neutral. So we have a lot of planning to do with
Thailand, because they have a member of CETO.
That's all changed now. And that would come under
us. When CETO had a meeting in Washington, for
example, my division was responsible for
organizing and planning the meeting, which
brings back to McNamara. Mrs. McNamara, bless her
soul, she recently ceased from cancer. We had all
this planned. And so of all things, now this is like
the detail I could expect Jimmy Carter to ask for.
She asked for the list. of liquor, kinds of liquor,
that we were going to serve. Where? At this
reception. Oh, at a reception. The Cito Meats
business bar and the social that followed it. So we
had listed Smirnoff Vodka and Cutty Sorts,
Scotch. She came back and she changed all of them.
Two-inch pegs that cut back some cutting saw to a
cheaper stock and spurred off back to a cheaper
vodka. And all across the board. And she really
didn't have anything to do about it, except she
did, of course, he had a responsibility for it. She
was just interested in keeping costs there. I
thought that was, to me, an interesting sideline
of what Ms. McNamara was doing, her attention to
detail. Then I had a division, an organization,
where But people were organized by country. In
some cases, more than one country was divided up.
So any paper that comes to us, and it could be
generated by the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marines
concerning our area, we would handle it and staff
it through the Joint Chiefs. And there's a regular
way you may know it with different colors they call
them. And that indicates the stage that you're in
when you start out. you end up buff, you know, you
work it. When you finally get it to where everybody
agrees it's ready to go to Joint Chiefs, then it is
actually a green color. And then when they agree to
it, I've already forgotten what color it is, it's
published in a different color. So that's the
short way to say, what's the status of this? You
say, well, it's still in the buff. And then you have
to arg it. or be prepared to argue to the Joint
Chiefs when they meet. You have to answer all the
questions about it. Now they have, they're
prepared because their staff has studied it and
used and made notes, changes, or additions. So
sometimes it doesn't, it can take hours,
sometimes days before it's ever done. But much of
the discussion, of course, there's
many things narrowed down to budget. in the Army
Navy Air Force, sure, nobody would accept a change
that would end up saying, well, you just gave up one
squadron of aircraft, but this means two more
ships going to multiple things. How many men did
you have under your command as chief? I think about
20. About 20, and they were probably all officers?
Yeah. Oh, yeah, they were. And they were all
experts in certain fields, in certain countries?
They were all colonels or... or captains of the
Navy.
And what? Do you remember what your plans were for
future Vietnam?
No, not really, because
the plan was to restore the stability of the
government and have it operated out of Seoul. I
mean, out of Saigon.
Did you feel that in your job, anybody was
listening to you? Or was the Vietnamese word so
important that they didn't worry about the future
plans for the Philippines or for Japan or
whatever? Well, of course, the plans are...
Actually, all the focus was on Vietnam to get
there.